Phase 2 Blog for the Git Plugin Performance Improvement Project (#3576)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2020/07/2020-07-29-git-performance-improvement-phase2.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Git Plugin Performance Improvement Phase-2 Progress"
tags:
- plugins
- git
- platform-sig
- developer
- performance
- gsoc
- gsoc2020
author: rishabhbudhouliya
opengraph:
  image: /images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/gsoc-git-opengraph.png
---

> The second phase of the link:https://www.jenkins.io/blog/2020/07/09/git-performance-improvement-phase1/[Git Plugin Performance Improvement project] has been great in terms of the progress we have achieved in implementing performance improvement insights

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second phase of the link:/blog/2020/07/09/git-performance-improvement-phase1/[Git Plugin Performance Improvement project] has been great in terms of the progress we have achieved in implementing performance improvement insights
```

> derived from the phase-1 link:https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jmh/[JMH] micro-benchmark experiments.

Reviewer 2: phase
```suggestion
derived from the phase one link:https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jmh/[JMH] micro-benchmark experiments.
```

> As we all know that performance of a git fetch is highly correlated to the size of the remote repository, our task was to find the difference in performance for the two available git implementations in the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin[Git Plugin], "Git" and "JGit".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What we've learned so far in this project is that a git fetch is highly correlated to the size of the remote repository. In order to make fetch improvements in this plugin, our task was to find the difference in performance for the two available git implementations in the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin[Git Plugin], "Git" and "JGit".
```

> Our major finding was that "Git" performs much better than "JGit" when it comes to a large sized repository (>100 MiB). Interestingly, "JGit" performs better than "Git" when size of the repository is less than 100 MiB. 

Reviewer 2: I wonder if markup would work for the post. 

For example: `git` instead of "Git" and `JGit` instead of "JGit"

Author: I've added backticks to format `git` and `Jgit` consistently across the blog.

In this phase, we were successful in coding this derived knowledge from the benchmarks into a new functionality called the 
GitToolChooser.

== GitToolChooser

> This class aims to add the functionality of recommending a git implementation on the basis of the size of a repository which has a strong correlation to the performance of git fetch (from Performance Benchmarks).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This class aims to add the functionality of recommending a git implementation on the basis of the size of a repository which has a strong correlation to the performance of git fetch (from performance benchmarks).
```

It utilizes two heuristics to calculate the size:

* Using cached .git dir from Multi-Branch Projects to estimate the size of a repository

> * Providing an extension point which upon implementation can use REST APIs exposed by git service providers like Github, GitLab etc to fetch the size of remote repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Providing an extension point which, upon implementation, can use REST APIs exposed by git service providers like Github, GitLab, etc to fetch the size of the remote repository.
```

> Will it optimise your Jenkins instance?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Will it optimize your Jenkins instance?
```
might be the American English speaking here... I'm ok to discard this suggestion 😄

Author: haha, I have replaced it with `z`. (🇺🇸)

> That depends on:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That requires one of the following:
```

> * If you have a multi branch project in your Jenkins instance, the plugin can use that to recommend the optimal git implementation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* you have a multibranch project in your Jenkins instance, the plugin can use that to recommend the optimal git implementation
```
not a big deal, seems to be how Jenkins doc refers to multibranch normally

> * Else if you have a Branch Source Plugin installed in the Jenkins instance, the plugin will recommend a git implementation using REST APIs provided by Github or GitLab respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* you have a branch source plugin installed in the Jenkins instance, the particular branch source plugin will recommend a git implementation using REST APIs provided by link:https://plugins.jenkins.io/github-branch-source/[GitHub] or link:https://plugins.jenkins.io/gitlab-branch-source/[GitLab] respectively.
```

> The architecture and code for this class is at:link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin/pull/931[PR-931]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture and code for this class is at: link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin/pull/931[PR-931]
```

*Note*: This functionality is an upcoming feature in the subsequent Git Plugin release.

=== JMH benchmarks in multiple environments

> The benchmarks were being executed on Linux and MacOS machines frequently but there was a need to check if the results gained from those benchmarks will hold true across many platforms which makes the solution (GitToolChooser) platform agnostic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The benchmarks were being executed on Linux and macOS machines frequently but there was a need to check if the results gained from those benchmarks would hold true across more platforms to ensure that the solution (GitToolChooser) is generally platform-agnostic.
```

To test this hypothesis, we performed an experiment:

Running git fetch operation for a 400 MiB sized repository on:

* `Windows`

> * `Free BSD 12`

Reviewer 3: Correct the operating system name
```suggestion
* `FreeBSD 12`
```

* ppc64le
* s390x

The result of running this experiment is given below:

image:/images/post-images/2020/07-git-plugin-performance-improvement/git-multiple-platforms.png[Performance on multiple platforms]

Observations:

* ppc64le and s390x are able to run the operation in almost half the time it takes for the Windows or Free BSD 12 machine. This behavior may be attributed to the increased computational power of those machines.

> * The difference in performance between Git and JGit remains constant across all platforms which is a positive sign for the GitToolChooser as its recommendation would be consistent across multiple devices and operating systems.

Reviewer 2: May want to apply consistent formatting as above if you'll format tool names for git/JGit

> * `ppc64le` and `s390x` are able to run the operation in almost half the time it takes for the `Windows` or `Free BSD 12` machine. This behavior may be attributed to the increased computational power of those machines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `ppc64le` and `s390x` are able to run the operation in almost half the time it takes for the `Windows` or `FreeBSD 12` machine. This behavior may be attributed to the increased computational power of those machines.
```

== Release Plan 🚀

link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/browse/JENKINS-49757[JENKINS-49757] - Avoid double fetch from Git checkout step

> This issue was fixed in the Phase 1, avoids the second fetch in redundant cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This issue was fixed in phase one, avoids the second fetch in redundant cases.
```
I'm not stuck on this formatting for `phase one`. The intent is primarily to format consistently.

It will be shipped with some benchmarks on the change in performance due to the removal of the second fetch.

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-client-plugin/pull/574[PR-574]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin/pull/904[PR-904]

*GitToolChooser*

* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/git-plugin/pull/931[PR-931]
This pull request is under review, will be shipped in one of the subsequent Git Plugin releases.

Current Challenges with GitToolChooser

* Implement the extension point to support GitHub Branch Source Plugin, Gitlab Branch Source Plugin, Gitea Branch Source Plugin.
* The current version of JGit doesn't support LFS checkout and sparse checkout, need to make sure that the recommendation doesn't break existing use cases.

== Future Work

> In Phase 3, we wish to:

Reviewer 2: Apply consistent capitalization/formatting for phases

> * Implement the extension point to support GitHub Branch Source Plugin, Gitlab Branch Source Plugin and Gitea Branch Source Plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Implement the extension point to support GitHub Branch Source Plugin, Gitlab Branch Source Plugin and Gitea Plugin.
```
